SOURCE: Isaac Newton, alchemical procedural manuscripts (Keynes MS 28 'Tabula Smaragdina' with commentary, c. 1690s; Keynes MS 49 'The Regimen', c. 1690s)
CITATION: The Chymistry of Isaac Newton, Indiana University Digital Library. http://webapp1.dlib.indiana.edu/newton/mss/dipl/ALCH00017 and ALCH00038. Ed. William R. Newman.

The following is drawn from Isaac Newton's alchemical procedural manuscripts as transcribed by the Chymistry of Isaac Newton Project (Indiana University), under the editorial direction of William R. Newman. Symbols in the original (e.g. Mercury, Sulphur, Gold, Silver, Antimony) are represented here by the spelled-out Latin or English substance names where legible. 

FROM KEYNES MS 28 (Newton's English rendering of the Tabula Smaragdina and his Latin commentary):

Tis true without lying, certain & most true. That w ch is below is like that w ch is above & that w ch is above is like y t w ch is below to do y e miracles of one only thing And as all things have been & arose from one by y e mediation of one : so all things have their birth from this one thing by adaptation. The Sun is its father, the moon its mother, the wind hath carried it in its belly, the earth is its nourse. The father of all perfection in y e whole world is here. Its force or power is entire if it be converted into earth. Separate thou y e earth from y e fire, y e subtile from the gross sweetly w th great indoustry. It ascends from y e earth to y e heaven & again it descends to y e earth & receives y e force of things superior & inferior. By this means you shall have y e glory of y e whole world & thereby all obscurity shall fly from you. Its force is above all force. ffor it vanquishes every subtile thing & penetrates every solid thing. So was y e world created. From this are & do come admirable adaptations where of y e means (or process) is here in this. Hence I am called Hermes Trismegist, having the three parts of y e philosophy of y e whole world That w ch I have said of y e operation of y e Sun is accomplished & ended. See y e ffrench Bibliotheque. Theatrum Chemicum vol. 6. p.715. & vol 1 p 362 et p 8 et p 166 & p 685 et vol 4 p 497 MS 28 MS 28 9 Hermes. Hermetis Trismegisti Opera Chemica. 6 Tabula Smaragdina. Verum est sine mendacio, certum et verissimum. Quod est inferius est sicut id quod est superius et quod est superius est sicut id quod est inferius ad perpetranda miracula rei unius. Et sicut res omnes fuerunt ab uno meditatione et consilio unius: ita omnes res nascuntur ab hac una re adaptione. Pater ejus est sol. Mater ejus est Luna Portavit illum Ventus in ventre suo, Nutrix ejus est Terra. Pater omnis perfectionis totius mundi est hic. Vis ejus est integra si versa fuerit in terram. Separabis terram ab igne, subtile a spisso suaviter magno cum diligentia et ingenio. Ascendit a terra in cælum iter- um  descendit in terram & recipit vim superiorum & inferiorum. Sic habebis gloriam totius mundi et fugiet a te tenabræ et omnis obscuritas. Hæc est enim totius fortitudinis fortitudo fortis. Nam vincet omnem rem subtilem omnen  solidam penetrabit. Sic Mundus crea- tus est. Hinc erunt adaptiones mirabiles quarum modus est hic. Ita  vocatus sum Hermes Trismegistus habens tres partes philosophiæ totius mundi. Completum est quod dixi de opere solari. Commentarium. ‡ <enerant> ad perpetranda miracula hujus rei unius. Et sicut res omnes ex uno Chao per consilium Dei unius creatæ sunt, sic in arte nostra res omnes id est elementa quatuor ex una hac re quæ nostrum Chaos est per consilium Artificis & pruden- tem rerum dispositionem adaptionem nascuntur. Est et ejus generatio humanæ similis, nimirum ex patre & matre qui sunt Sol et Luna. Et quando per ho- rum coitum Infans concipitur, pertatu gestatur is in ventre venti nostri Draconis

FROM KEYNES MS 49 'The Regimen' (Newton's aphoristic statement of the alchemical Work):

The Regimen. 17 Aphorism 1. 1 The work consists of two parts the first of w ch is called the gross work & by many imbibitions & putrefactions purges the matter from it's gross feces & exalts it highly in vertue & then whitens it. Aph 2 The second part also putrifies the matter by severall imbibitions & thereby purges it from y e few remaining feces & exalts it much higher in vertue & then whitens it. ffor the two parts of the work resemble one another & have the same linear process. Aph 4 1 In both works the Sun & Moon are joyned & bathed & putrefied in their proper menstruum & in the second work by this conjunction they beget the young king whose birth is in a white colour & ends the second work unles you shall think fit to decoct one half of it to y e red. Aph. 5 The feces w ch in the second work are separted by y e putrefactions when the putrefactions are over & the matter relents into a white water, fall to the bottom of the water & must be separated. Aph 6 The young new born king is nourished in a bigger heat with milk drawn by destilla tion from the putrefied matter of the second work. With this milk he must be imbibed seven times to putrefy him sufficiently & then decocted to the white & red, & in passing to y e red he must be imbibed once or twice w th a little red oyle to fortify y e solary nature & make the red stone more fluxible. And this may be called the third work. The first work goes on no further then to putrefaction the second goes on to y e white & y e third to y e red. Aph. 6 7. The white & red sulphurs are multiplied by their proper mercuries (white & red) of the second or third work, wherein a little of the fixt salt is dissol- ved. Aph 3 The putrefaction of y e second work lasts about five months & is done by seven imbibitions or at most by 9 or 10, & for promoting the putre faction the spirit is drawn of at y e end of every imbibition & digestion. Annotations upon y e foregoing Aphorisms. This Process I take to be y e work of the best Authors, Hermes , Turba, Morien , Artephius , Abraham y e Jew & Flammel , Scala Ripley , Maier , The great Rosary, Char- nock , Trevisan , Philaletha , Despagnet . 1. ffor Hermes tells us Pater ejus est sol mater Luna, Ventus portavit eum in ventre suo, Terra est ejus nutrix that is And This is to be understood of the second work wherein the young King is begotten of the sun & moon & from thence forward untill the time of his nativity carried in the belly of the aery bath of the sun & Moon, & after his nativity nourished with milk drawn out of y e putrid putrid black earth. Hermes : Draco non moritur nisi cum fratre & sorore interficiatur, non per unum solum sed per ambos simul scilicet per solem et Lunam. Philo- sophus: Mercurius nunquam moritur nisi cum sorore sua interficiatur: id est cum Luna vel sole illum congelare oportet. Nota quod Draco est argentum vivum extractum a corporibus, habens in se corpus animam et spiritum, super quo dicit Draco non moritur nisi cum fratre suo et sorore sua; id est sole et Luna, id est sulphure extracto habente in se naturam humiditatis & frigiditatis ratione Lunæ; cum illis Draco moritur, id est argentum vivum ab ijsdem corporibus extractum a primordio, quæ est aqua permanens Philosophorum, quæ fit post putrefactionem & post separationem elementorum, & aqua illa alio nomine dicitur aqua fætida. Rosar. p. 157. Maier Embl 25.  The Dragon therefore is neither body soul nor spirit but consists of all three & is the Menstruum tertium & permanens. Maier adds that in y e doctrine above written all authors agree. This is the Dragon w ch kept the golden ffleece & whom Iason overcame by the images of the Sun & Moon, the serpent of Æsculapius , the serpent of Saturn, & the Mercury about whose rod were writhen two serpents, the Sun & Moon Maier Embl 25. These serpents are fflammel Dragons, a male & female a fixt & volatile, the Sun & Moon. Conjunge fratrem cum sorore & propina illis poculum amoris. ffrater est ardens et siccus, ideo  valde cholericus: soror est frgida et humida multum  flegmaticæ in se habens materiæ: Quæ in temperie adeò differentes naturæ in amore & fæcunditate, liberorum  propagatione optimè convenire solent Verum frater & soror conjuncti non fæcundi non fiunt nec in amore diu persistunt nisi philothesium illis seu poculum amoris instar philtri propinetur. Hoc enim sedantur & conciliantur eorum animi adeò ut quasi ebrij (instar Lothi) inter se pudore abjecto congrediantur & prolem (non spuriam sed) legitimam progenerent. Maier Embl. 4. The same thing is represented in the great Rosary by a King & Queen sitting in a Bath. Nothing can exalt tinctures but o e to plusquam perfection but o r dissolving water w ch I told you floweth from three springs. The one is a common well at w ch all draw. This well hath in it a Saturnine drossiness w ch make the waters unusefull. These frigid superfluities are purged by two other springs through w ch this water is artificially caused to run. These springs make but one we