SOURCE: Isaac Newton, The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy (Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica), Book I: Definitions and Axioms/Laws of Motion. Translated by Andrew Motte (1729), from the 1846 New York edition.
CITATION: Internet Archive - 'Newton's Principia: the mathematical principles of natural philosophy' (1846). https://archive.org/details/newtonspmathema00newtrich

DEFINITIONS. DEFINITION I. 77w? quantity of matter is the measure of the same, arising from its density and hulk conjutictly. THUS air of a double density, in a double space, is quadruple in quan- ti ty ; in a triple space, sextuple in quantity. The same thing is to be un derstood of snow, and fine dust or powders, that are condensed by compres sion or liquefaction • and of all bodies that are by any causes whatever differently condensed. I have no regard in this place to a medium, if any such there is, that freely pervades the interstices between the parts oi bodies. It is this quantity that I mean hereafter everywhere under the name of body or mass. And the same is known by the weight of each body ; for it is proportional to the weight, as I have found by experiments on pendulums, very accurately made, which shall be shewn hereafter. DEFINITION II. The quantity of motion is the measure nf tlie same, arising from the velocity and quantity of matter corjunctly. The motion of the whole i&lt;! the sum of the motions of all the parts ; and therefore in a body double in quantity, with equal velocity, the motion is iouble ; with twice the velocity, it is quadruple, DEFINITION III. The vis insita, or innate force of matter, is a power of resisting, hy which every body, as much as in it lies, endeavours to persevere in its present stale, whether it be of rest, or of moving uniformly forward in a right line. This force is ever proportional to the body whose force it is ; and differs nothing from the inactivity of the mass, but in our manner of conceiving T4 THE MATHEMATICAL PRINCIPLES it. A body, from the inactivity of matter, is not without difficulty put out of its state of rest or motion. Upon which account, this vis insita, may, by a most significant name, be called vis inertia, or force of inactivity. Hut a body exerts this force only, when another force, impressed upon it, endeavours to change its condition ; and the exercise of this force may bo considered both as resistance and impulse ; it is resistance, in so far as the body, for maintaining its present state, withstands the force impressed; it is impulse, in so far as the body, by not easily giving way to the impressed force of another, endeavours to change the state of that other. Resistance is usually ascribed to bodies at rest, and impulse to those in motion; but motion and rest, as commonly conceived, are only relatively distin guished ; nor are those bodies always truly at rest, which commonly are taken to be so. DKFLMTIOX IV. Ait impressed force is an action exerted upon a body, in order to change its state, either of rest, or of moving uniformly forward in a right line. This force consists in the action only; and remains no longer in the body, when the action is over. For a body maintains every new state it acquires, by its vis inertice only. Impressed forces are of differe.it origins • as from percussion, from pressure, from centripetal force. DEFINITION V. A centripetal force is that by which bodies are drawn or impelled, or any way tend, towards a point as to a centre. Of this sort is gravity, by which bodies tend to the centre of the earth magnetism, by which iron tends to the loadstone ; and that force, what ever it is, by which the planets are perpetually drawn aside from the rec tilinear motions, which otherwise they would pursue, and made to revolve in curvilinear orbits. A stone, whirled about in a sling, endeavours to re cede from the hand that turns it ; and by that endeavour, distends the sling, and that with so much the greater force, as it is revolved with the greater velocity, and as soon as ever it is let go, flies away. That force which opposes itself to this endeavour, and by which the sling perpetually draws back the stone towards the hand, and retains it in its orbit, because it is directed to the hand as the centre of the orbit, I call the centripetal force. And the same thing is to be understood of all bodies, revolved in any orbits. They all endeavour to recede from the centres of their orbits ; and wore it not for the opposition of a contrary force which restrains them to, and detains them in their orbits, which I therefore call centripetal, would tiy off in right lines, with an uniform motion. A projectile, if it was not for the force of gravity, would not deviate towards the earth, tut would OF NATUJIAL PHILOSOPHY. 7fl go off from it in a right line, and that with an uniform motion,, if the re sistance of the air was taken away. It is by its gravity that it is drawn aside perpetually from its rectilinear course, and made to deviate towards the earth, more or less, according to the force of its gravity, and the velo city of its motion. The less its gravity is, for the quantity of its matter, or the greater the velocity with which it is projected, the less will it devi ate from a rectilinear course, and the farther it will go. If a leaden balJ, projected from the top of a mountain by the force of gunpowder with a given velocity, and in a direction parallel to the horizon, is carried in a curve line to the distance of two miles before it falls to the ground ; the same, if the resistance of the air were taken away, with a double or decuple velocity, would fly twice or ten times as far. And by increasing the velo city, we may at pleasure increase the distance to which it might be pro jected, and diminish the curvature of the line, which it might describe, till at last it should fall at the distance of 10, 30, or 90 degrees, or even might go quite round the whole earth before it falls ; or lastly, so that it might never fall to the earth, but go forward into the celestial spaces, and pro ceed in its motion in iiifiuitum. And after the same manner that a pro jectile, by the force of gravity, may be made to revolve in an orbit, and go round the whole earth, the moon also, either by the force of gravity, if it is endued with gravity, or by any other force, that impels it towards the earth, may be perpetually drawn aside towards the earth, out of the r&amp;ti- linear way, which by its innate force it would pursue; and would be made to revolve in the orbit which it now describes ; nor could the moon with out some such force, be retained in its orbit. If this force was too small, it would not sufficiently turn the moon out of a rectilinear course : if it was too great, it would turn it too much, arid draw down the moon from its orbit towards the earth. It is necessary, that the force be of a just quantity, and it belongs to the mathematicians to find the force, that may serve exactly to retain a body in a given orbit, with a given velocity ; and vice versa, to determine the curvilinear way, into which a body projected from a given place, with a given velocity, may be made to deviate from its natural rectilinear way, by means of a given force. The quantity of any centripetal force may be considered as of three kinds; aboolu'e, accelerative, and motive. DEFINITION VI. The absolute quantity of a centripetal force is the measure f&gt;f the same proportional to the efficacy of the cause that propagates it from the cen tre, through the spaces round about. Thus the magnetic force is greater in one load-stone and less in another according to their sizes and strength of intensity. 76 THE MATHEMATICAL PRINCIPLES DEFINITION VII. The accelerative quantity of a centripetal force is the measure, of tht same, proportional to the velocity which it generates in a given time. Thus the force of the same

AXIOMS, OR LAWS OF MOTION. LAW I. Hvery body perseveres in its state of rest, or of uniform motion in a ri^ht line, unless it is compelled to change that state by forces impressed thereon. PROJECTILES persevere in their motions, so far as they are not retarded by the resistance of the air, or impelled downwards by the force of gravity A top, whose parts by their cohesion are perpetually drawn aside from rectilinear motions, does not cease its rotation, otherwise than as it is re tarded by the air. The greater bodies of the planets and comets, meeting with less resistance in more free spaces, preserve then jDotions both pro gressive and circular for a much longer time. LAW II. The alteration of motion is ever proportional to the motive force imp reus ed ; and is made in the direction of the right line in. which that force is impressed. If any force generates a motion, a double force will generate double the motion, a triple force triple the motion, whether that force be impressed altogether and at once, or gradually and successively. And this motion (being always directed the same way with the generating force), if the body moved before, is added to or subducted from the former motion, according as they directly conspire with or are directly contrary to each other ; or obliquely joined, when they are oblique, so as to produce a new motion compounded from the determination of both. LAW III. To every action there is always opposed an equal reaction : or the mu tual actions of two bodies upon each other are always equal, and di rected to contrary parts. Whatever draws or presses another is as much drawn or pressed by that other. If you press a stone with your finger, the finger is also pressed by the stone. If a horse draws a stone tied to a rope, the horse (if I may so say) will be equally drawn back towards the stone: for the distended rope, by the same endeavour to relax or unbend itself, will draw the horse as much towards the stone, as it does the stone towards the horse, and will obstruct the progress of the one as much as it advances that of the other. 84 THE MATHEMATICAL PRINCIPLES If a body impinge upon another, and by its force change the motion of (It* other, that body also (because of the equality of the mutual pressure) will undergo an equal change, in its own motion, towards the contrary part. The changes made by these actions are equal, not in the velocities but in the motions of bodies ; that is to say, if the bodies are not hindered by any other impediments. For, because the motions are equally changed, the changes of the velocities made towards contrary parts are reciprocally pro portional to the bodies. This law takes place also in attractions, as will be proved in the next scholium. COROLLARY I. A body by two forces conjoined will describe the diagonal of a parallelo gram, in the same time that it wovld describe the sides, by those forces apart. If a body in a given time, by the force M impressed apart in the place A, should with an uniform motion / be carried from A to B ; and by the force N impressed apart in the same place, should be carried from A to c ~\) C ; complete the parallelogram ABCD, and, by both forces acting together, it will in the same time be carried in the diagonal from A to D. For since the force N acts in the direction of the line AC, parallel to BD, this force (by the second law) will not at all alter the velocity generated by the other force M, by which the body is carried towards the line BD. The body therefore will arrive at the line BD in the same time, whether the rorce N be impressed or not ; and therefore at the end of that time it will he found somewhere in the line BD. By the same argument, at the end of the same time it AY ill be found somewhere in the line CD. Therefore it will be found in the point D, where both lines meet. But it will move in ;i right line from A to D, by Law I. COROLLARY II. And hence is explained the composition of any one direct force AD, out of any two oblique forces AC and CD ; and, on the contrary, the re solution of any one direct force AD into two oblique forces AC and CD : which composition and resolution are abundantly confirmed from, mechanics. As if the unequal radii OM and ON drawn from the centre O of any wheel, should sustain the weights A and P by the cords MA and NP ; and the forces of those weights to move the wheel were required. Through the rentre O draw the right line KOL, meeting the cords perpendicularly in A and L; and from the centre O, with OL the greater of the distances OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. OK arid OL, describe a circle, meeting the cord MA in D : and drawing OD, make AC paral- "^ lei and DC perpendicular thereto. Now, it being indifferent whether the points K, L, D, of the cords be lixed to the plane of the wheel or not, the weights will have the same effect whether they are suspended from the points K and L, or from D and L. Let the whole force of the weight A be represented by the line AD, and let it be reso