 James F. CORUM, et al. Zenneck Wave Transmitter -- Tesla's Magnifying Transmitter reinvented -- articles & patents rexresearch James F. CORUM , et al. Zenneck Wave Transmitter https://vizivtechnologies.com/ Viziv Technologies The Evolution to Wireless Power & Signaling The team at Viziv Technologies is committed to making the world a better place through cutting edge scientific research and technological advancement. By transforming wireless power and signaling industries, we can help improve human life on a global scale. ABOUT VIZIV TECHNOLOGIES, LLC Viziv Technologies is the culmination of over four decades of research in the field of Electromagnetic Surface Waves. They have assembled an experienced team from academia, industry, and government to take this revolutionary science from laboratory to industry. These men and women have joined together under one calling… POWER THE PLANET AND BRING LIGHT TO THE WORLD Viziv’s mission is the commercialization of the Zenneck surface wave in all of its various product applications. From communications to energy to sensing, Viziv’s technological advances are opening doors to a new era in science and engineering. https://science.howstuffworks.com/engineering/civil/whats-really-going-on-at-tesla-tower.htm What's Really Going on at the 'Tesla Tower'? by Nathan Chandler Zenneck Wave Patents G. Goubau: Surface Wave Transmission line US2685068 G. Goubau Launching and Receiving Surface waves US2921277 G. Goubau https://forbiddenknowledgetv.net/tesla-technology-has-been-revived/3 Tesla Technology Has Been Revived Aaron and Melissa Dykes of TruthstreamMedia were driving outside of Dallas near the small farming town of Milford, Texas, when a strange tower in the middle of a field caught their eye. It almost seemed like a joke because the shape was unmistakable. It looked just like Tesla/" target="_blank"&gt;Nikola Tesla’s Wardenclyffe Tower, the legendary experimental wireless transmission station he built in 1901 in Shoreham, New York to transmit phone calls, fax images and electrical power but which was demolished 16 years later due to bankruptcy. A little bit of research revealed that the tower’s owners are Viziv Technologies and that the structure is, in fact a Tesla wireless transmission tower! Viziv is currently reviving the technologies of Tesla/" target="_blank"&gt;Nikola Tesla, having “developed a system of patent-pending processes and equipment to efficiently launch the Zenneck surface wave…[which is ] an electromagnetic wave that uses the surface of the earth as a waveguide enabling it to carry communications signals or electrical power efficiently over long distances…”... https://vizivtechnologies.com/technology/ The Viziv surface wave system represents a paradigm shift in the science of electromagnetics. WHAT IT IS Our Viziv surface wave system allows the Earth itself to be used for clean, safe and efficient transfer of power between any two points on the globe, wirelessly. The system represents a paradigm shift in the science of electromagnetics. Today’s power distribution system of wired grids is fragile and aging. The transition to a global wireless system utilizing the Zenneck surface wave is a breakthrough that will effectively “cut the cord” between power generation facilities and the local distribution grids. This breakthrough will significantly enhance energy surety, reliability, and resiliency of the world’s electrical distribution systems. HOW IT WORKS Viziv Technologies has developed a system of patent-pending processes and equipment to efficiently launch the Zenneck surface wave. Currently, our research and commercialization efforts are focused on energy transfer and communications, but we recognize that this technology has the potential to impact numerous sectors of the economy. A Zenneck Surface Wave is an electromagnetic wave that uses the surface of the earth as a waveguide enabling it to carry communications signals or electrical power efficiently over long distances. This wireless power system will employ a “transmitter probe,” located near a power generation plant, to launch a Zenneck carrier wave. Receiver antennae will be positioned appropriately around the world to receive the signal and download the power into a local microgrid or conventional grid architecture. The wave is impervious to weather effects such as lightning or geomagnetic disturbance or electromagnetic pulses (EMP), including those associated with a nuclear detonation. Unlike a wired grid, the Zenneck wave cannot be physically attacked and cyber attacks would be challenged to target or cause cascading failures to a wireless system. When launched, the Zenneck Surface Wave literally envelops the planet like a balloon, enabling transmitter probes to be placed anywhere power can be generated and receivers to be placed anywhere power is needed.... https://vizivtechnologies.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/TWP-Paper-10-3-2017.pdf [ PDF ] http://www.bielek.com/corum.htm The Montauk Experiment & Montauk Survivor Accounts Dr. James F Corum looks at the Philadelphia experiment through the critical eyes of a scientist. In the late 1970's, he recruited a team of scientists to, for fun, see if there was any scientific basis for the description of events that occurred during the Philadelphia experiment as expressed in the book, "The Philadelphia Experiment", by Berlitz and Moore. Much to everybody's astonishment, there was. In 1994 at the Tesla Symposium at Colorado Springs, he, along with his brother K.L. Corum Ph.D. and J.F.X Daum, PhD., presented their findings in a paper titled "Tesla's Egg of Columbus, Radar Stealth, The Torsion Tensor, and the Philadelphia Experiment" They were, in a laboratory, able to replicate radar invisibility with their "egg of Columbus" apparatus. Their initial conclusion was as follows: "The analysis would appear to lend credence to the hypothesis that something more than mythology is involved, and it renders plausible the conclusion that sufficient motivation exists to actually conduct a "Philadelphia Experiment" to examine radar stealth on ships with electric drives. Independent of whether our assumed values are practical or not, the analysis, which uses no phenomenology that wasn't known subsequent to 1938, would probably have brought WWII Naval investigators to the point of radar stealth experimentation. In fact, it would have been derelict behavior for the Defense Science Research Board not to have conducted such experiments if it were aware of the Phenomenology (as it must have been) in 1943. Such an approach to stealth, however, is impractical and certainly would be of little interest, as such, to the military today." His paper is, as he says, to serve as a "basis for discussion" for "critical, not skeptical" scientific thinking about the possibilities of scientific explanation for the events surrounding the Philadelphia Experiment. He asks other scientists to review his team's work and provide critical feedback. James F. CORUM , et al. : Zenneck Wave Transmitter Patents SUPERPOSITION OF GUIDED SURFACE WAVES ON LOSSY MEDIA US2018151933 [ PDF ] Disclosed are various embodiments for superposition of guided surface wave launched along the surface of a lossy medium. In one example, Zenneck surface waves are launched along a surface of a lossy conducting medium using an array of guided surface waveguide probes and a predefined field pattern of the Zenneck surface waves is maintained. The individual ones of the guided surface waveguide probes include a feed network electrically coupled to a charge terminal. The feed network provides a phase delay that matches a wave tilt angle associated with a complex Brewster angle of incidence associated with the lossy conducting medium Authentication to enable/disable guided surface wave receive equipment US2017077715 [ PDF ] Disclosed are various embodiments for exciting a guided surface waveguide probe to create a plurality of resultant fields that are substantially mode-matched to a Zenneck surface wave mode of a surface of a lossy conducting medium. EXCITATION AND USE OF GUIDED SURFACE WAVE MODES ON LOSSY MEDIA US9912031 [ PDF ] Disclosed are various embodiments for exciting a guided surface waveguide probe to create a plurality of resultant fields that are substantially mode-matched to a Zenneck surface wave mode of a surface of a lossy conducting medium. EXCITATION AND USE OF GUIDED SURFACE WAVE MODES ON LOSSY MEDIA US9910144 [ PDF ] Disclosed are various embodiments systems and methods for transmission and reception of electrical energy along a surface of a lossy conducting medium medium. In one example, a receive circuit is used to receive electrical energy from a guided surface waveguide probe that transmits the electrical energy in the form of a Zenneck surface wave along a surface of a a lossy conducting medium. VARIABLE FREQUENCY RECEIVERS FOR GUIDED SURFACE WAVE TRANSMISSIONS US2018159374 [ PDF ] Disclosed herein are various embodiments for a guided surface waveguide probe and a guided surface wave receiver, where the guided surface wave receiver comprises processing circuitry that (a) identifies at least one frequency from a plurality of available frequencies associated with a transmission of Zenneck surface waves along a terrestrial medium, and (b) adjusts a frequency at which the guided surface wave receiver receives electrical energy from the Zenneck surface waves via the terrestrial medium to a predetermined frequency. 